docs: RTD migration (#708)
canonical/opensearch-operator: docs/how-to/recover-from-attached-storage.md

(how-to-recover-from-attached-storage)=
# How to recover from attached storage

This document describes the steps needed to reuse disks that contain data
and metadata of an OpenSearch cluster.

```{note}
This document's steps can only be applied for disks under Juju management.
It is not currently supported to bring external disks or volumes into Juju.
```

```{caution}
Make sure you have safely backed up your data,
the steps described here may potentially cause data loss.
```

## Introduction

This document will describe the different steps needed to bring disks that have previously

> being used by OpenSearch, and hence still hold data and metadata of that cluster;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
been used by OpenSearch, and hence still hold data and metadata of that cluster;
```

and how to reuse these disks. These disks will be named across this document as *used disks*.

The document is intended for cases where a quick recovery is needed.
However, it is important to understand that reusing disks may cause older data
to override existing / newer data. Make sure the disks and their content are known
before proceeding with any of the steps described below.

### Pre-requisites

Before starting, make sure that the disks are visible within Juju.

> For the reminder of the document, the following deployment will be used as example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the remainder of the document, the following deployment will be used as example:
```

For more details, [refer to Juju storage management documentation](https://juju.is/docs/juju/manage-storage).

## Re-using disks use-cases

> OpenSearch does have a set of APIs and mechanisms to detect the existence of previous data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch provides a set of APIs and mechanisms to detect existing data
```

10.81.173.102 15 98 16 3.75 5.59 4.99 dim cluster_manager,data,ingest,ml - opensearch-3.f1a
10.81.173.48  20 98 16 3.75 5.59 4.99 dim cluster_manager,data,ingest,ml - opensearch-2.f1a
10.81.173.167 29 98 16 3.75 5.59 4.99 dim cluster_manager,data,ingest,ml * opensearch-1.f1a
```

### Different cluster scenarios

In these cases, the cluster has been removed and the application will be redeployed
reusing these disks in part or in total. In all of the following cases, the `opensearch-node`
CLI will be needed to clean up portions of the metadata.

#### Reusing a disk in a *different cluster*

To reuse a disk from another cluster, add a new unit with the *used disk*:

```shell
juju add-unit opensearch --attach-storage opensearch-data/0
```

The deployment of this node will eventually stop its normal process and will be unable to proceed.
That happens because the new unit holds old metadata, with reference to the *old cluster UUID*.
To resolve that, access the unit:

```shell
juju ssh opensearch/0
```

Checking the logs, it is possible to see the unit is waiting for the cluster to become available
and intermittently listing its last-known peers that are now unreachable.

> The following message on the logs will show up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following message will appear in the logs:
```

```text
sudo journalctl -u snap.opensearch.daemon -f
...

Caused by: org.opensearch.cluster.coordination.CoordinationStateRejectedException: join validation on cluster state with a different cluster uuid K-LFo5AqQ--lamWCNc6ZsA than local cluster uuid gRaym5GmSUebyPO5o3Ay4w, rejecting
```

To remove the stale metadata, first, stop the service:

```shell
sudo systemctl stop snap.opensearch.daemon
```

> Then, execute detach the node from its old references:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, detach the node from its old references:
```

```

Restart the service:

```shell
sudo systemctl start snap.opensearch.daemon
```

> The cluster will be correctly form a new UUID. It is possible to also add more units, either fresh ones or even units detached from another cluster, as explained on the previous section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cluster will correctly form a new UUID. It is possible to also add more units, either fresh ones or even units detached from another cluster, as explained on the previous section.
```

## Dangling indices

Now, the *used disk*  is successfully mounted to the cluster.

> The next step is to check for indices that  did not exist in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to check for indices that did not exist in the cluster.
```

That can be done using the `/_dangling` API.

> To understand n more details how to list and recover dangling indices, refer to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details on how to list and recover dangling indices, refer to the
```

[OpenSearch documentation on this API](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/api-reference/index-apis/dangling-index/).

```{caution}

> This API cannot offer any guarantees as to whether the imported data truly represents the latest state of the data

Reviewer: Todo
```suggestion
This API cannot guarantee that the imported data accurately represents the latest state of the data
```
